# Weather Forecasting Using Machine Learning Algorithms

## Introduction

Weather prediction is crucial in many fields with operations and protection requirements worldwide (Bag et al., 2022). In the recent past, the use of Machine learning (ML) algorithms has been implemented in the process of this forecasting with the foresight predictions being accurate. Previously, analysts utilized numerical simulations of the model to predict and this methodology rather posed some challenges in depicting pertinent aspects of the circulation in the atmosphere (Kochkov et al., 2024). Business forecasting is made accurate by machine learning because large data sets are analyzed to identify distinguishing features for prediction. Other factors that are important for the generation of the weather include humidity, pressure and clouds (Lakra and Avishek, 2022). The objective of this research is to explore the usage of ML in increasing meteorological prediction and the parameters that must be incorporated into consideration as well as the Integration of the most efficient algorithms. The increase in data access for weather data helps in enhancing refreshing and oversimplified Weather-based ML-based forecasting models for utility purposes across various sectors.

## DataSet Description
This research procedure will use a weather dataset. The dataset that was collected was from Cambridge University’s website and Kaggle . Source:- (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/weather/),  (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thedevastator/weather-prediction/data?select=weather_prediction_dataset.csv) 
This dataset consists of descriptions of meteorological variables along with both raw and Units converted forms. The other independent variables are cloud cover, abbreviated as CC in oktas, wind direction as DD in degrees, wind speed as FG and gust as FX in m/s and humidity abbreviated as HU in fraction of 100 (Kaggle, 2024). The pressure (PP) is given in 1000 hPa, global radiation (QQ) in 100 Wm², and precipitation amount (RR) in 10 mm, Sunshine duration (SS) is in hours, the mean temperature (TG) together with the minimum and maximum temperatures (TN, TX) is in °C. The present features allow for a detailed evaluation of the weather status within the atmosphere, temperature, and radiation.

## Selection of Algorithm models for Research
## Linear Regression
Linear Regression is selected as the best fitting model due to its application in interpretation of the correlation between features and the target variable. Subsequent to building the model using the training data (X_train, y_train), numerical accuracy is assessed by the MAE, MSE, RMSE and the coefficient of determination (R²). These metrics are used to evaluate the proposed model regarding its accuracy and capability of prediction. The evaluation facilitates comparison with other elaborate models to identify compatibility requirements suitable for the dataset.
## Random Forest
The Random Forest Regressor is chosen because the model can well interpret interactions between features and their importance. It is trained using the training data (X_train, y_train) and evaluated using various metrics: MAE, MSE, RMSE, and R². These are by and large measures of the accuracy of the models, the errors involved in the prediction, and the extent of their predictive abilities. The importance of features is also tested to determine the most significant refractories of the dependent variable. This helps explain how a model arrived at such a decision and what features played a major role in the decision-making.
## Gradient Boosting
Gradient Boosting model is selected because it can deal with non-linear variables and enhanced ensemble learning. Their results indicate that it integrates many weak models to develop a single, more precise predictor. In the last segment of model assessment, the MAE, MSE, RMSE and R² measures are applied to measure the performance of the model. These metrics give a holistic view on accuracy and on how good the model is in predicting unseen data making this model highly recommendable for regression tasks. 
## Support Vector Regressor
SVR is selected as it is capable of dealing with nonlinearity and high-dimensionality of the data. Prediction accuracy is enhanced in SVR due to the fact that the algorithm seeks to achieve the largest margin of error for the hyperplane that is to be formed. Methods of accuracy, errors and predictive performance include: MAE, MSE, RMSE and the coefficient of determination (R²). Therefore, the overfitting resistance and generalization capability make it potentially useful with such complicated characteristics, whereas it can determine detailed prognosis even though the forwarded parameters show nonlinear associations with weather conditions.
## XGBoost Regressor
XGBoost Regresser is chosen due to its ability to work with big data with intricate features. It incorporates gradient boosting with additional such as regularization to avoid the problem of over fitting. It combines several weak learners’ work to improve the predictive models and minimize the level of error in conclusions. Other predictors include the degree of model accuracy—MAE, MSE, RMSE, R²—are used to establish the model’s error range. Based on the characteristics that illustrate flexibility in handling of non-linear models and missing data, XGBoost Regresser is highly appropriate for use in weather prediction for accuracy and reliability of results.
## Evaluation Method
The metrics are used to determine whether the machine learning models are accurate for weather forecasting or not. Two model fit measures employed in this study are R² and RMSE in which R² stand for R-squared while RMSE means Root Mean Square Error.
## R² or R-squared
R² is the statistical coefficient which determines the extent to which the dependent variable can be explained by the independent variables in a model. It shows the goodness-of-fit and is always between 0 and 1. The value of R² is higher in case of better interpretation of the variability, accordingly low R² value indicates poor prediction capability of the model. In meteorology to show how well the model gives the right picture of the weather, R² is used to determine this. It could be useful in some of those methods if used together with other measures, which define the error magnitude more accurately.
## RMSE or Root Mean Square Error
RMSE gives an estimation of the mean squared error which gives valuable information about variance of prediction errors. It determines the typical size of the discrepancies between the observed and the forecasted values. This is because RMSE is valuable in exposing the level of approximation of the forecasts with observed values especially when accuracy is key in the weather information archive. A smaller RMSE value means better predictive results needed in marketing for product development and forecasting. Together with R², the relative measure of the mean squared error, RMSE, addresses both the goodness-of-fit and the magnitude of the error making these measures the cornerstone of model assessment.


